Earth

Your home. Our mission.

NASA is an exploration agency, and one of our missions is to know our home. We develop novel tools and techniques for understanding how our planet works -- for the benefit of humanity and for insights we need to explore other moons and planets. NASA's Earth Science Division operates more than 20 satellites in orbit, sponsors hundreds of research programs and studies, and funds opportunities to put data to use for societal needs. We develop new ways to observe the oceans, land cover, ice, atmosphere, and life, and we measure how changes in one drive changes in others over the short and long term. While listening to and collaborating with industry leaders, international partners, academic institutions, and other users of our data, we drive innovations and deliver science to help inform decisions that benefit the nation and the world.

Recent News and Articles

NASA-European Sea Level Mission Homes in on El Niño

Painting the Growing Season in the Maize Triangle

NASA Develops Sensor to Improve Firefighter Safety

NASA-developed AI Could Help Track Harmful Algae

Earth Observatory Image of the Day

In fire-prone ecosystems in Australia's Northern Territory, prescribed burns are lit to minimize the severity of fires later in the…

An astronaut’s photo, taken en route to the Moon, reveals our planet and its place in space in a novel…

The sprawling storm promised to deliver torrential rain across a wide swath of southern Japan.

How NASA Uses Light to Detect Waste From Mines

Tens of thousands of abandoned mines threaten waterways across the American West, but identifying which sites urgently need cleanup is slow and expensive. Now, NASA’s EMIT instrument can analyze the unique light signatures of mine waste from space to help focus remediation efforts where they're needed most.

Science in Action for Society

Learn how NASA’s studies of Earth bring benefits to the nation and world.

NASA Is Helping Bring Giant Tortoises Back to the Galápagos

NASA Data Helps Maine Oyster Farmers Choose Where to Grow

Meet Mineral Mappers Flying NASA Tech Out West

How NASA Is Testing AI to Make Earth-Observing Satellites Smarter

SWOT Mission Unlocks a New View of Our Waterways

Using data from the SWOT (Surface Water and Ocean Topography) mission, jointly developed by the NASA/JPL and the Centre National d'Études Spatiales with contributions from the Canadian Space Agency and the United Kingdom Space Agency, scientists can now measure rivers continuously and across the entire globe for the first time in human history. From the Mississippi River to the Amazon, these observations reveal how rivers flow, how they change over time, and how they support ecosystems, economies, and communities worldwide like never before.

NASA’s Hurricane Science, Tech, Data Help American Communities

NASA's cutting-edge research, technology, and tools bolster the nation’s readiness and response to severe weather.

Sensing the Seas

For more than forty years, NASA has found unique ways to study the surface layers of the ocean from the tropics to the poles. With three new missions since 2020 – PACE, SWOT, and Sentinel 6-Michael Freilich – we are now ushering in a new era of ocean studies.

NASA’s PACE Mission Reveals a Year of Terrestrial Data on Plant Health

NASA, French SWOT Satellite Offers Big View of Small Ocean Features

Next-Generation Water Satellite Maps Seafloor From Space

NASA’s PACE, US-European SWOT Satellites Offer Combined Look at Ocean

NASA Analysis Shows Irreversible Sea Level Rise for Pacific Islands

Our Oceans from Space

NASA video on YouTube

Why Is NASA Tracking Seaweed From Space?

NASA video on YouTube

PACE Makes the Invisible Visible

NASA video on YouTube

Earth Information Center

For more than 50 years, NASA satellites have provided data on Earth's land, water, air, temperature, and climate. NASA's Earth Information Center allows visitors to see how our planet is changing in six key areas: sea level rise and coastal impacts, health and air quality, wildfires, greenhouse gases, sustainable energy, and agriculture.

Connect with NASAEarth

Explore Earth Science

Earth Science Missions

In order to study the Earth as a whole system and understand how it is changing, NASA develops and supports…

Earth Science at Work

NASA Earth Science helps Americans respond to challenges and societal needs — such as wildland fires, hurricanes, and water supplies…

Earth Science Data

Open access to NASA’s archive of Earth science data