Mars

Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun, and the seventh largest. It’s the only planet we know of inhabited entirely by robots.

Mission Status

Featured Topics

Next-Gen Mars Helicopter: Rotor Blades Surpass Mach 1

Perseverance Completes First AI-Planned Drive on Mars

Mars Rock Samples: The Stories They Could Tell

Read the Mars Exploration Science Goals

Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars

Mars Overview

Mars is no place for the faint-hearted. It’s dry, rocky, and bitter cold. The fourth planet from the Sun, Mars is one of Earth's two closest planetary neighbors (Venus is the other). Mars is one of the easiest planets to spot in the night sky — it looks like a bright red point of light.

Despite being inhospitable to humans, robotic explorers — like NASA's Perseverance rover and Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter — serve as pathfinders to eventually get astronauts to the surface of the Red Planet.

More Mars Facts

Learn about its formation, structure, atmosphere, size and distance, moons, and much more.

NASA Says Farewell to MAVEN, Declares End of Mission

The first mission devoted to observing the Martian atmosphere and its evolution, NASA’s MAVEN (Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution) has ended after more than 11 years in orbit at Mars and a decade beyond its primary, one-year mission. The spacecraft was heard last on Dec. 6, when it experienced an unexpected loss of signal after it passed behind the Red Planet. A review board NASA convened in February to evaluate recovery efforts and assess MAVEN’s probable current state, determined that the spacecraft is not recoverable, and no longer performing its science and data relay mission.

NASA’s Psyche Mission Aces Mars Flyby, Targets Metal-Rich Asteroid

The spacecraft successfully maneuvered around Mars on May 15, speeding it up and setting its course for the main asteroid belt, where it will study the asteroid Psyche in 2029. The flyby also served as a training run, during which Psyche calibrated its instruments ahead of its asteroid encounter, while capturing unique views of the Red Planet.

Mars Gives a Boost to the Psyche Mission

Watch the video to learn about the Psyche spacecraft, its mission, its target — a compelling metal-rich asteroid, also named Psyche — and why the Mars gravity assist was crucial to this journey.

View the Psyche Flyby of Mars, With NASA’s ‘Eyes on the Solar System’

Use NASA's 3D interactive app to visualize the Psyche spacecraft during its journey. Relive the event, the May 15 gravity assist, when Psyche drew on Mars' gravitational pull to speed up and steer the spacecraft toward its destination in the asteroid belt. Or see where Psyche is right now, beyond Mars and en route to explore the intriguing metal-rich asteroid, also named Psyche, in 2029.

Perseverance, Curiosity Exploring Two Sides of Mars

They’re exploring different areas of the Red Planet, about 2,300 miles apart (about 3,700 kilometers), but together the Perseverance and Curiosity rovers are covering billions of years of Mars’ history. They’re digging into the evidence on the ground, teaching us more and more about how Mars formed, how it changed from an environment that was once wetter and warmer, and whether it was ever home to ancient microbial life. They’ve even captured detailed panoramas, to show off the very different terrain they each are studying.

How We Explore Mars

NASA has five active missions at the Red Planet and a future mission under study.

PERSEVERANCE MARS ROVER | Active Mission

The Mars 2020 mission Perseverance rover is the first step of a proposed roundtrip journey to return Mars samples to Earth. Launch: July 30, 2020 | 11:50 UTC Mars Landing: Feb. 18, 2021 | 20:55 UTC

CURIOSITY MARS ROVER | Active Mission

Curiosity is investigating Mars to determine whether the Red Planet was ever habitable to microbial life. Launch: Nov. 26, 2011 | 15:02 UTC Mars Landing: Aug. 6, 2012 | 05:32 UTC

MARS RECONNAISSANCE ORBITER | Active Mission

Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter searches for evidence that water persisted on the surface of Mars for a long period of time. Launch: Aug. 12, 2005 Mars Arrival: Mar. 10, 2006

MARS ODYSSEY | Active Mission

Mars Odyssey mission created the first global map of chemical elements and minerals that make up the Martian surface. Launch: April 7, 2001 | 15:02:22 UTC Mars Arrival: Oct. 24, 2001

NASA’s Curiosity Finds Organic Molecules Never Seen Before on Mars

After years of lab work, the results are in: A rock that NASA’s Curiosity Mars rover drilled and analyzed in…

Perseverance Completes First Artificial Intelligence-Planned Drives on Another Planet

The demonstration, executed on Dec. 8 and 10, used generative AI to create waypoints for Perseverance, a complex decision-making task typically performed by human rover planners. They usually analyze terrain to sketch a route that avoids any potential hazards, then send that plan to the rover. The vast distance to Mars creates a significant communication lag, so real-time remote driving is impossible. Increased autonomous navigation holds a promise of improved mission efficiency and broadened exploration.

Meet the Mars Samples: Sapphire Canyon (Sample 25)

Meet the 25th Martian sample collected by NASA’s Mars Perseverance rover – “Sapphire Canyon” – a sample taken from a vein-filled rock named “Cheyava Falls.” The arrowhead-shaped rock contains compelling features that may help answer whether Mars was home to microscopic life in the distant past.

Why Do We Go?

Mars is one of the most explored bodies in our solar system, and it's the only planet where we've sent rovers to explore the alien landscape. NASA missions have found lots of evidence that Mars was much wetter and warmer, with a thicker atmosphere, billions of years ago.

Mars Relay Network: Communications Bridge Between Mars & Earth

entered mars orbit: March 10, 2006

Celebrating NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter’s 20th Anniversary

Crater Near Sirenum Fossae

This impact crater, as seen by NASA's Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter in 2015, appears relatively recent as it has a sharp rim and well-preserved ejecta. Credits: NASA/JPL-Caltech/Univ. of Arizona

entered mars orbit: March 10, 2006

Celebrating NASA’s Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter’s 20th Anniversary

Mars Resources

View the one-stop shop for all Mars iconic images, videos, and more!

To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video

News & Features

NASA Says Farewell to MAVEN Mars Mission, Hosts Media Call Today

NASA Uses Mineralogical Marker to Understand Ancient Martian Climate

NASA’s Psyche Mission Aces Mars Flyby, Targets Metal-Rich Asteroid

NASA’s MAVEN Makes 1st Discovery of Atmospheric Effect at Mars

Curiosity Shakes Loose a Pesky Rock

Beyond the Moon

Humans to Mars

Like the Moon, Mars is a rich destination for scientific discovery and a driver of technologies that will enable humans to travel and explore far from Earth.

Mars remains our horizon goal for human exploration because it is one of the only other places we know in the solar system where life may have existed. What we learn about the Red Planet will tell us more about our Earth’s past and future, and may help answer whether life exists beyond our home planet.

Discover More Topics From NASA

Mars Science Laboratory: Curiosity Rover

Part of NASA's Mars Science Laboratory mission, at the time of launch, Curiosity was the largest and most capable rover…

Mars 2020: Perseverance Rover

NASA’s Mars Perseverance rover seeks signs of ancient life and collects samples of rock and regolith for possible Earth return.

Mars Odyssey Science

Odyssey has contributed numerous science results supporting the Mars Exploration Program’s overall strategy, “Follow the Water.”

Mars Exploration

Mars is the only planet we know of inhabited entirely by robots. Learn more about the Mars Missions.