The Moon

From lighting up our skies to preserving evidence of our solar system’s history, Earth’s closest neighbor plays a pivotal role in the study of our planet and beyond.

OBSERVE THE MOON

Daily Moon Guide

NASA's interactive map for observing the Moon, every day of the year.

Next Total Lunar Eclipse

International Observe the Moon Night

Artemis Updates

Get the latest Moon mission news on the Artemis blog.

Moon Composition & Structure

Like Earth, the Moon consists of three main layers: a crust, a mantle, and a core.

Billions of years ago, the Moon was a molten world. As it solidified, the heaviest materials (metals like iron) sank down into the Moon’s center, and the lighter materials (lower density rocks) rose towards the surface. The result is a structure a bit like a chocolate-dipped cherry – solid core, mostly solid/partly liquid mantle, and thin outer crust.

Does the Moon Have an Atmosphere?

Yes, but just barely.

In contrast to Earth’s thick layers of air, the Moon’s exosphere is a bit like the haze you get when you whack a dirty rug with a broom: it includes a sampling of particles knocked free by impact. But instead of a rug, these particles come from the lunar surface. Instead of flying through the air, they’re ejected into near-emptiness. And instead of a broom, the Moon is pummeled by space debris.

Lunar Craters

Earth's Moon is covered in craters.

Lunar craters tell us the history not only of the Moon, but of other worlds, too. On the Moon, where there’s no liquid water or wind, evidence of our solar system's impact history has been preserved for billions of years.

Moon Phases

Earth's view of the half-sunlit Moon shifts throughout the month.

As our perspective changes, we observe a pattern known as lunar phases: new moon, waxing crescent, first quarter, waxing gibbous, full moon, waning gibbous, third quarter, and waning crescent.

How Did the Moon Form?

Earth’s Moon was born out of destruction.

There are several theories about our Moon’s formation, but almost all share this point in common. Our early solar system was the scene of violent smashups that could end in obliteration or new, larger objects. Those mashed-together objects make up the planets, moons, asteroids and other solar system objects we know today.

Uncovering Lunar Water

There’s water on the Moon.

Ancient ice hidden deep in permanently shadowed craters. H20 molecules on the sunlit lunar surface. Humanity's search for water on the Moon began hundreds of years ago. Here's a brief history of discoveries leading up to the confirmation of its presence.

Artemis II Crew Image

Far Side of the Moon

The Moon's far side gets as much sunlight as its near side.

Like Earth, the Moon has a day side and a night side, which change as the Moon spins through space. The Sun always illuminates half of the Moon while the other half remains dark. The far side of the Moon was about 20% sunlit during the Artemis II crew's lunar flyby. Around the farthest point in their journey, the astronauts saw both the Moon and Earth in a waxing crescent phase.

Artemis II Crew Image

Far Side of the Moon

Features

Moon Dust

We can learn a lot from studying Moon dust—and, the Moon's powdery surface presents challenges for human and robotic explorers.

Lunar Volcanism

The Moon does not have erupting volcanoes today, but it was once flooded with flowing lava.

The Moon & Tides

As distant as the Moon may seem, its gravitational pull plays a huge role in the formation of Earth's ocean tides.

Moon Phases 2026

This visualization shows the Moon's phase and libration at hourly intervals throughout 2026, as viewed from the Northern Hemisphere.

Moon Stories

Moon-Venus Conjunction

Bonus: Behind the Scenes of Artemis II with NASA Experts

At the Edge of Light

NASA to Host Artemis II Crew Postflight News Conference

NASA Welcomes Record-Setting Artemis II Moonfarers Back to Earth

New Perspective of Home

Twin NASA Control Rooms Support Artemis Safety, Success

NASA’s Artemis II Crew Beams Official Moon Flyby Photos to Earth

EXPLORATION X Science

The Science of Artemis

The Moon is a 4.5-billion-year-old time capsule, pristinely preserved by the cold vacuum of space.

Artemis II carried its crew farther from Earth and closer to the Moon than any human has been in over half a century. The astronauts on board were both scientists and subjects as they flew around the far side of the Moon and back.

EXPLORATION X Science

The Science of Artemis

Observe the Moon

Daily Moon Guide

NASA’s interactive map for observing the Moon each day of the year.

Moon Observation Journal

Spend the next month getting to know the Moon.

International Observe the Moon Night

You're invited! Learn more and see how people around the world #ObserveTheMoon together.

Lunar Melt Mappers

Help NASA map the Moon's molten flows with Lunar Melt, a citizen science project. Anyone with access to a computer can join in!

Discover More Topics From NASA

International Observe the Moon Night

You're invited! Each International Observe the Moon Night, people around the world celebrate lunar observation, science, exploration, arts, and culture.

Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter

NASA's Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) was sent to the Moon to make high-resolution maps of the composition of the lunar…

Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope

The Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope will settle essential questions in the areas of dark energy, exoplanets, and astrophysics.