About the Planets

Our solar system has eight planets: Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. There are five officially recognized dwarf planets in our solar system: Ceres, Pluto, Haumea, Makemake, and Eris.

Introduction

What is a planet? The word traces back to the ancient Greek word planēt, which means “wanderer.” A more modern definition can be found in the Merriam-Webster dictionary, which defines a planet as “any of the large bodies that revolve around the Sun in the solar system.”

In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) — a group of astronomers that names objects in our solar system — agreed on their own definition of “planet.” This new definition  caused Pluto's famous “demotion” to a dwarf planet, and reduced the solar system census from nine planets to eight.

Inner Planets

The first four planets from the Sun are Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars. These inner planets also are known as terrestrial planets because they have solid surfaces.

Mercury Facts

Mercury is the planet nearest to the Sun, and the smallest planet in our solar system.

Venus Facts

Venus is the second planet from the Sun, and the sixth largest planet.

Earth Facts

Earth – our home planet – is the third planet from the Sun, and the fifth largest planet.

Mars Facts

Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun, and the seventh largest planet.

Outer Planets

The giant planets in the outer solar system don't have hard surfaces. Instead, they have swirling gases above a core. Jupiter and Saturn are gas giants. Uranus and Neptune are ice giants.

Jupiter Facts

Jupiter is the fifth planet from the Sun, and the largest planet in our solar system.

Saturn Facts

Saturn is the sixth planet from the Sun, the second largest planet in our solar system.

Uranus Facts

Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun, and the third largest planet in our solar system.

Neptune Facts

Neptune is the eighth and most distant planet in our solar system. It's the fourth largest planet.

Dwarf Planets

Dwarf planets include longtime favorite Pluto, Ceres, Makemake, Haumea, and Eris. Ceres is the only dwarf planet in the inner solar system. It's in the main asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter.

Ceres Facts

Dwarf planet Ceres is the largest object in the asteroid belt between Mars and Jupiter, and it's the only dwarf planet in the inner solar system.

Pluto Facts

Pluto was long considered our solar system's ninth planet. It was reclassified as a dwarf planet in 2006 by the International Astronomical Union.

Haumea Facts

Haumea was nicknamed Santa by one discovery team. It is oval-shaped, and is one of the fastest rotating large objects in our solar system.

Makemake Facts

Makemake is slightly smaller than Pluto, and is the second-brightest object in the Kuiper Belt, while Pluto is the brightest.

Eris Facts

The discovery of Eris helped trigger the debate in the scientific community that led to the decision to clarify the definition of a planet.

Planet Sizes and Locations in Our Solar System

Our solar system has eight planets, and five officially recognized dwarf planets. Which planet is biggest? Which is smallest? What…

Is There Another Planet in the Solar System?

It's an intriguing idea that might explain some current mysteries, but direct evidence of another planet has yet to be found.

Temperatures Across Our Solar System

Let’s look at the mean temperature of the Sun, and the planets in our solar system.

Discover More

Solar System Exploration