The Sun

The Sun is the star at the heart of our solar system. Its gravity holds the solar system together, keeping everything — from the biggest planets to the smallest bits of debris — in its orbit.

Overview

The Sun's gravity holds the solar system together, keeping everything – from the biggest planets to the smallest particles of debris – in its orbit. The connection and interactions between the Sun and Earth drive the seasons, ocean currents, weather, climate, radiation belts and auroras. Though it is special to us , there are billions of stars like our Sun scattered across the Milky Way galaxy.

The Sun has many names in many cultures. The Latin word for Sun is “sol,” which is the main adjective for all things Sun-related: solar.

Pop Culture

The Sun has inspired us since ancient times. It’s central to mythology and religion in cultures around the world, including the ancient Egyptians, the Aztecs of Mexico, Native American tribes of North and South America, the Chinese, and many others.

Countless musicians have written songs about the Sun. The Beatles had a hit in 1969 with “Here Comes the Sun.” Other popular songs that reference the Sun include: “Walkin’ on the Sun” by Smashmouth; “Ain’t No Sunshine” by Bill Withers; “Walking on Sunshine” by Katrina and the Waves; “Pocketful of Sunshine” by Natasha Bedingfield; and “Let the Sunshine In” by the Fifth Dimension.

If you're Superman or a fellow Kryptonian of comic book fame, your powers are heightened by the yellow glow of our Sun. There are several science fiction films featuring the Sun in the storyline.

To Protect Artemis II Astronauts, NASA Experts Keep Eyes on Sun

As four astronauts travel around the Moon on NASA’s Artemis II mission, they will venture beyond Earth’s protective magnetic field. The crew’s…

NASA HEAT - Resources for Educators

The Sun can provide a fun and exciting laboratory for exploring magnetism, gravity, light, energy, and much more! Learn how to integrate heliophysics concepts and resources into existing educational and outreach activities with the NASA Heliophysics Education Activation Team (NASA HEAT).

The Sungrazer Project

Want to be a part of science and discovery? Join this research effort to hunt for comets that pass close to the Sun.

Sun Stories

NASA’s Juno Reveals New Insights into Cosmic Ray Origins

Strong Flare Erupts from Sun

NASA’s AWE Completes Mission to Study Earth’s Effect on Space Weather

NASA Missions Track Record-Breaking Radio Burst from Sun

New NASA HEAT Coloring Book Blends Art, Science, and Cultural Perspectives

The Sun

Learn More and Get Involved

For Kids: All About the Sun

Facts and activities for K-4 explorers.

NASA Photojournal: The Sun

Images and videos of scientific interest.

Discover More Topics From NASA

Mars

Mars is the fourth planet from the Sun, and the seventh largest. It’s the only planet we know of inhabited…