Uranus

Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun, and the third largest planet in our solar system. It appears to spin sideways.

About Planet Uranus

Uranus is the seventh planet from the Sun, and the third largest planet in our solar system – about four times wider than Earth.

Uranus is very cold and windy. It is surrounded by faint rings, and more than two dozen small moons. It rotates at a nearly 90-degree angle from the plane of its orbit. This unique tilt makes Uranus appear to spin on its side.

Planet Uranus Exploration

Only one spacecraft has explored planet Uranus.

In January 1986, Voyager 2 made a close approach to Uranus , snapping images of the planet and some its moons .

Planet Uranus Moons

Meet the Literary Moons

Uranus has 28 known moons , including five major moons: Miranda, Ariel, Umbriel, Titania, and Oberon. The moons are sometimes called the "literary moons" because they are named for Shakespearean characters, along with a couple of the moons being named for characters from the works of Alexander Pope.

Ice Giant Resources

Resources for Uranus and Neptune.

Explore a curated collection of resources about ice giants, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, and posters.

Voyager 2

40th Anniversary of Uranus Flyby The first human-made object to fly past Uranus, Voyager 2 made its closest approach on Jan. 24, 1986, and during its visit discovered 10 new moons, two new rings, and a magnetic field stronger than Saturn's, while returning images and data that still fuel discoveries today. Voyager 2 finished its encounter in February, enroute to a rendezvous with Neptune in 1989. Learn More About Voyager 2's Uranus Encounter

40th Anniversary of Uranus Flyby

The first human-made object to fly past Uranus, Voyager 2 made its closest approach on Jan. 24, 1986, and during its visit discovered 10 new moons, two new rings, and a magnetic field stronger than Saturn's, while returning images and data that still fuel discoveries today. Voyager 2 finished its encounter in February, enroute to a rendezvous with Neptune in 1989.

Learn More About Voyager 2's Uranus Encounter

Even decades after Voyager 2 became the first, and so far only, spacecraft to visit Uranus, its data has led to revelations about the ice giant. Read ‘Mining Old Data From NASA’s Voyager 2 Solves Several Uranus Mysteries’

Even decades after Voyager 2 became the first, and so far only, spacecraft to visit Uranus, its data has led to revelations about the ice giant.

Read ‘Mining Old Data From NASA’s Voyager 2 Solves Several Uranus Mysteries’

Eyes on the Solar System: Uranus

Solar System News

NASA’s Juno Reveals New Insights into Cosmic Ray Origins

Strong Flare Erupts from Sun

NASA Says Farewell to MAVEN Mars Mission, Hosts Media Call Today

Tropical Solstice Shadows

Learn More

For Kids: All About Planet Uranus

Facts about Planet Uranus for kids.

Ice Giant Resources

A curated collection of resources about ice giants, including activities that can be done at home, as well as videos and animations, images, and posters.

NASA Photojournal: Planet Uranus

Images of planet Uranus from NASA spacecraft.

Discover More Topics From NASA

Solar System Exploration